IMPLEMENTATION_STATUS.md, before:

## Ability Scores Feature - Implementation Complete

### Summary

Successfully implemented Ability Score Assignment system for RPG Character Service. The system supports multiple assignment methods (standard_array, point_buy, manual, roll) with comprehensive validation, persistent storage, and full integration with the character creation workflow.

---

## Implementation Checklist

### ✅ Database Layer

- [x] **AbilityScoreSet Model** created with all 6 ability scores (str, dex, con, int, wis, cha)
- [x] **Character Model** updated with optional `abilityScoreSetId` field
- [x] **CharacterDraft Model** updated with optional `abilityScoreSetId` field  
- [x] **Foreign Key Relationships** established with proper cascade behavior (SET NULL on delete)
- [x] **Migration** created and applied (mig4: `20260216182403_mig4`)
- [x] **Database Table** created with proper schema and constraints

### ✅ Service Layer

- [x] **DraftService.setAbilityScoresForDraft()** - Sets or updates ability scores for a draft
- [x] **DraftService.validateAbilityScores()** - Validates scores based on method:
  - [x] standard_array: Exact match to [15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8]
  - [x] point_buy: 8-15 range, cost ≤ 27 points
  - [x] manual: 3-20 range (accepts any valid value)
  - [x] roll: 3-20 range (accepts any valid value)
- [x] **DraftService.getDraft()** - Updated to include ability scores in response
- [x] **DraftService.finalizeDraft()** - Updated to copy ability scores to Character
- [x] **CharacterSheetService.buildCharacterSheet()** - Updated to include ability scores

### ✅ Controller Layer

- [x] **DraftController.setAbilityScores()** - HTTP handler for ability scores endpoint
- [x] **Error Handling** - 400 for validation errors, 404 for not found, 500 for server errors
- [x] **Parameter Validation** - Checks all required fields present and valid

### ✅ Route Layer

- [x] **Route Registration** - New endpoint `POST /api/drafts/:id/ability-scores`
- [x] **Proper Binding** - Controller method properly bound to route

### ✅ Type Definitions

- [x] **AbilityScoreSet Interface** - New type for ability score data
- [x] **Character Interface** - Updated with abilityScoreSetId field
- [x] **CharacterDraft Interface** - Updated with abilityScoreSetId field
- [x] **CharacterSheetResponse Interface** - Updated to include ability scores
- [x] **DraftResponse Interface** - Updated to include ability scores

### ✅ Testing

- [x] **REST Client Tests** - Added 5 test cases to test.rest:
  - Standard array method
  - Point buy method
  - Manual assignment method
  - Roll method
  - Invalid standard array (error case)
- [x] **Compilation** - Zero TypeScript errors
- [x] **Type Checking** - All types valid and consistent
- [x] **Build Output** - Successfully generated to dist/

### ✅ Documentation

- [x] **README.md** - Comprehensive ability scores section added:
  - Supported methods table
  - Model structure
  - Draft workflow examples
  - Validation rules
  - Complete workflow walkthrough
  - Architecture notes
- [x] **ABILITY_SCORES_IMPLEMENTATION.md** - Detailed technical documentation:
  - Database changes
  - Service implementation details
  - Controller/Route design
  - API examples
  - Complete workflows
  - Future enhancements
  - Performance notes
  - Security considerations

---

## File Changes Summary

### Modified Files

1. **prisma/schema.prisma**
   - Added `AbilityScoreSet` model
   - Updated `Character` with `abilityScoreSetId` field
   - Updated `CharacterDraft` with `abilityScoreSetId` field

2. **src/services/draftService.ts**
   - Added `setAbilityScoresForDraft()` method
   - Added `validateAbilityScores()` private method
   - Updated `getDraft()` to include ability scores
   - Updated `finalizeDraft()` to copy ability scores to Character

3. **src/services/characterSheetService.ts**
   - Updated `buildCharacterSheet()` to include ability scores in response

4. **src/controllers/draftController.ts**
   - Added `setAbilityScores()` handler method

5. **src/routes/draftRoutes.ts**
   - Added route for `POST /api/drafts/:id/ability-scores`

6. **src/types/index.ts**
   - Added `AbilityScoreSet` interface
   - Updated `Character` interface
   - Updated `CharacterDraft` interface
   - Updated `CharacterSheetResponse` interface
   - Updated `DraftResponse` interface

7. **test.rest**
   - Added 5 new test cases for ability scores endpoints

8. **README.md**
   - Added comprehensive "Ability Score Assignment" section

### Created Files

1. **ABILITY_SCORES_IMPLEMENTATION.md** - Technical implementation guide

### Database Migrations

1. **prisma/migrations/20260216182403_mig4/migration.sql** - Ability scores migration applied

---

## API Endpoints

### New Endpoint

```
POST /api/drafts/:id/ability-scores
```

**Request Body**:
```json
{
  "method": "standard_array|point_buy|manual|roll",
  "str": number,
  "dex": number,
  "con": number,
  "int": number,
  "wis": number,
  "cha": number
}
```

**Response**: Updated draft including ability scores

**Status Codes**:
- 200: Success - ability scores set
- 400: Validation error - invalid scores for method
- 404: Draft not found
- 500: Server error

### Updated Endpoints

1. **GET /api/drafts/:id** - Now includes `abilityScores` field
2. **GET /api/characters/:id/sheet** - Now includes `abilityScores` in character object

---

## Validation Rules

### Standard Array
- Must contain exactly: [15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8]
- Order doesn't matter
- Error: "Invalid standard array scores. Must use values: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8"

### Point Buy
- Each score: 8-15
- Total cost ≤ 27 points
- Cost: (score - 8) for 8-13, +7 for 14, +9 for 15
- Error: "Point buy total cost X exceeds limit of 27"

### Manual
- Each score: 3-20
- No other restrictions
- Error: "Manual ability scores must be between 3 and 20"

### Roll
- Each score: 3-20
- No other restrictions
- Error: "Rolled ability scores must be between 3 and 20"

---

## Integration Points

### Character Creation Workflow

```
1. Create Draft → POST /api/drafts
2. Set Class → POST /api/drafts/:id/class
3. [Optional] Set Race → POST /api/drafts/:id/race
4. [Optional] Set Background → POST /api/drafts/:id/background
5. [Optional] Set Ability Scores → POST /api/drafts/:id/ability-scores ← NEW
6. Save Choices → POST /api/drafts/:id/choices
7. Finalize Draft → POST /api/drafts/:id/finalize
```

### Character Display

```
Character Sheet → GET /api/characters/:id/sheet
├── Basic Info
├── Class/Race/Background
├── Ability Scores ← NEW
├── Features
├── Required Choices
├── Selected Choices
└── Missing Choices
```

---

## Technical Highlights

### Data-Driven Design
- Validation rules implemented in code (ready for database-driven rules in future)
- No hardcoded game logic
- Extensible method field for new assignment systems

### Reusable Entity
- `AbilityScoreSet` is independent entity
- Can be shared across multiple characters and drafts
- Efficient storage without duplication

### Proper Relationships
- Foreign key constraints with SET NULL on delete
- Optional relationships (characters can exist without ability scores)
- Maintains referential integrity

### Error Handling
- Descriptive validation error messages
- Proper HTTP status codes
- Clear separation of error types (validation vs. not found vs. server)

### Type Safety
- Full TypeScript interfaces
- No implicit `any` types
- Proper null handling with optional fields

---

## Compilation & Build Status

- **TypeScript Version**: 5.x
- **Build Command**: `npm run build`
- **Type Check**: `npx tsc --noEmit`
- **Status**: ✅ Zero errors
- **Output**: dist/ folder with all compiled JavaScript

### Build Artifacts

```
dist/
├── app.js
├── server.js
├── controllers/
│   └── draftController.js
├── services/
│   ├── characterSheetService.js
│   └── draftService.js
├── routes/
│   └── draftRoutes.js
├── types/
│   └── index.js
├── middleware/
│   └── errorHandler.js
└── utils/
    └── logger.js
```

---

## Migration Status

| Migration | Name | Status | Created |
|-----------|------|--------|---------|
| mig1 | 20260216174315_mig1 | ✅ Applied | Initial schema |
| mig2 | 20260216180531_mig2 | ✅ Applied | Draft system |
| mig3 | 20260216181023_mig3 | ✅ Applied | Race/Background |
| mig4 | 20260216182403_mig4 | ✅ Applied | **Ability Scores** |

### mig4 Details

**Tables Modified**:
- `characters` - Added `abilityScoreSetId` column
- `character_drafts` - Added `abilityScoreSetId` column

**Tables Created**:
- `ability_score_sets` - New table with 6 ability score columns

**Constraints**:
- Foreign key: characters → ability_score_sets (ON DELETE SET NULL)
- Foreign key: character_drafts → ability_score_sets (ON DELETE SET NULL)

---

## Testing Instructions

### Manual HTTP Testing

Using test.rest file (for REST Client extension):

```http
# 1. Create a draft
POST http://localhost:4000/api/drafts
{
  "name": "TestCharacter"
}
# Response: { "id": "draft-id", ... }

# 2. Set ability scores with standard array
POST http://localhost:4000/api/drafts/draft-id/ability-scores
{
  "method": "standard_array",
  "str": 15,
  "dex": 14,
  "con": 13,
  "int": 12,
  "wis": 10,
  "cha": 8
}
# Response: Draft with abilityScores: { ... }

# 3. Get updated draft
GET http://localhost:4000/api/drafts/draft-id
# Response: Draft with abilityScores included
```

### Integration Testing

After server restart (to load compiled code):

```bash
# 1. Create draft
DRAFT_ID=$(... POST /api/drafts ...)

# 2. Set class
... POST /api/drafts/$DRAFT_ID/class ...

# 3. Set ability scores
... POST /api/drafts/$DRAFT_ID/ability-scores ...

# 4. Complete workflow
... (choices, finalize) ...

# 5. Get character sheet
GET /api/characters/<character-id>/sheet
# Should include abilityScores field
```

---

## Architecture Considerations

### Future Enhancement: Modifier System

The ability score system is prepared for a modifier system:

```typescript
// Future: Ability Score Modifiers
interface AbilityScoreModifier {
  id: string
  abilityScoreSetId: string
  source: "race" | "item" | "effect"  // Human +1/+1, Ring of +2, etc.
  modifiers: {
    str: number
    dex: number
    // ... etc
  }
}

// Derived calculation:
// displayedStr = baseAbilityScore.str + sum(modifiers)
```

### Current State vs. Future State

**Current** (Implemented):
- ✅ Base ability scores storage
- ✅ Multiple assignment methods with validation
- ✅ Persistent storage
- ✅ Character sheet includes scores

**Future** (Extensible):
- ⏳ Racial ability bonuses (Human +1/+1)
- ⏳ Item bonuses (Ring of +2 to DEX)
- ⏳ Temporary effects (Buff +2 STR for battle)
- ⏳ Automatic derived statistics (modifiers, attack rolls)
- ⏳ Ability score capping rules per game system

---

## Security Notes

- ✅ Server-side validation (no client-side reliance)
- ✅ Clear error messages (no info leaking)
- ✅ Proper input sanitization
- ✅ No SQL injection risk (Prisma + ORM)
- ✅ Ability scores are not modified after draft finalization (in current design)

---

## Performance Characteristics

- **Storage**: ~50 bytes per AbilityScoreSet row
- **Query Performance**: Single include in Prisma query, no N+1 issues
- **Shared Entities**: Potential 100% reuse if templates added
- **Database Impact**: Minimal (one extra table, two nullable columns)

---

## Completion Status

```
┌─ Database Tier ─────────────────────────────────┐
│  ✅ Schema Design              ✅ Migration
│  ✅ Models Created             ✅ Foreign Keys
│  ✅ Relations Defined          ✅ Constraints
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

┌─ Service/Business Logic Tier ──────────────────┐
│  ✅ Validation Logic           ✅ Error Handling
│  ✅ State Management           ✅ Reusability
│  ✅ Integration Points         ✅ Extensibility
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

┌─ Controller/Route Tier ────────────────────────┐
│  ✅ HTTP Handler               ✅ Route Binding
│  ✅ Request Validation         ✅ Response Format
│  ✅ Status Code Handling       ✅ Error Mapping
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

┌─ Type System Tier ─────────────────────────────┐
│  ✅ Interface Definitions      ✅ Type Safety
│  ✅ Optional Fields            ✅ Consistency
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

┌─ Testing & Documentation Tier ─────────────────┐
│  ✅ REST Client Tests          ✅ README Section
│  ✅ Examples Provided          ✅ Tech Documentation
│  ✅ Compilation Passing        ✅ Type Checking
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## Next Steps (When Ready)

1. **Server Restart**: Stop current process, run `node dist/server.js` for updated code
2. **Database Testing**: Create draft → set ability scores → verify persistence
3. **Full Workflow**: Test complete character creation including ability scores
4. **Integration**: Test character sheet returned with scores populated
5. **Validation**: Verify validation for each method (standard_array, point_buy, etc.)

---

## Files & Line References

- [DraftService](src/services/draftService.ts#L214) - Validation and setting logic
- [DraftController](src/controllers/draftController.ts#L129) - HTTP endpoint handler
- [Routes](src/routes/draftRoutes.ts#L14) - Route registration
- [Schema](prisma/schema.prisma#L119) - AbilityScoreSet model
- [Types](src/types/index.ts#L1) - Type definitions
- [Tests](test.rest) - REST Client examples
- [README](README.md) - User-facing documentation
- [Migration](prisma/migrations/20260216182403_mig4/migration.sql) - Database changes

---

## Implementation Complete ✅

The Ability Score Assignment system is fully implemented, type-checked, compiled successfully, and ready for deployment. All validation rules are in place, the database schema is prepared, and the API endpoints are ready for use.

Last Updated: 2026-02-16

Commit message:

Synchronize status docs with resolver baseline

IMPLEMENTATION_STATUS.md, after:

## Current Platform Status (2026-02-20)

### Summary

The active implementation baseline has moved beyond the initial Ability Score milestone and now runs on a resolver-driven rules graph pipeline.

- Character sheet projection is resolver-only for feature/modifier output (`GET /api/characters/:id/sheet`).
- Legacy sheet cutover/fallback env flags were removed from runtime config and docs.
- Dependency graph contract (`depends_on/requires/excludes`) is imported and enforced by resolver filtering.
- Draft domain enforces `chooseCount` and selected option consistency.
- Importer pipeline is primary path (`dry-run` + transactional `apply` + immutable `sourceRef` guard + structured issue report).
- Local smoke baseline passes (`26/26`) on the current branch.

Historical implementation details for the original Ability Score phase are preserved below.

---

## Ability Scores Feature - Implementation Complete

### Summary

Successfully implemented Ability Score Assignment system for RPG Character Service. The system supports multiple assignment methods (standard_array, point_buy, manual, roll) with comprehensive validation, persistent storage, and full integration with the character creation workflow.

---

## Implementation Checklist

### ✅ Database Layer

- [x] **AbilityScoreSet Model** created with all 6 ability scores (str, dex, con, int, wis, cha)
- [x] **Character Model** updated with optional `abilityScoreSetId` field
- [x] **CharacterDraft Model** updated with optional `abilityScoreSetId` field  
- [x] **Foreign Key Relationships** established with proper cascade behavior (SET NULL on delete)
- [x] **Migration** created and applied (mig4: `20260216182403_mig4`)
- [x] **Database Table** created with proper schema and constraints

### ✅ Service Layer

- [x] **DraftService.setAbilityScoresForDraft()** - Sets or updates ability scores for a draft
- [x] **DraftService.validateAbilityScores()** - Validates scores based on method:
  - [x] standard_array: Exact match to [15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8]
  - [x] point_buy: 8-15 range, cost ≤ 27 points
  - [x] manual: 3-20 range (accepts any valid value)
  - [x] roll: 3-20 range (accepts any valid value)
- [x] **DraftService.getDraft()** - Updated to include ability scores in response
- [x] **DraftService.finalizeDraft()** - Updated to copy ability scores to Character
- [x] **CharacterSheetService.buildCharacterSheet()** - Updated to include ability scores

### ✅ Controller Layer

- [x] **DraftController.setAbilityScores()** - HTTP handler for ability scores endpoint
- [x] **Error Handling** - 400 for validation errors, 404 for not found, 500 for server errors
- [x] **Parameter Validation** - Checks all required fields present and valid

### ✅ Route Layer

- [x] **Route Registration** - New endpoint `POST /api/drafts/:id/ability-scores`
- [x] **Proper Binding** - Controller method properly bound to route

### ✅ Type Definitions

- [x] **AbilityScoreSet Interface** - New type for ability score data
- [x] **Character Interface** - Updated with abilityScoreSetId field
- [x] **CharacterDraft Interface** - Updated with abilityScoreSetId field
- [x] **CharacterSheetResponse Interface** - Updated to include ability scores
- [x] **DraftResponse Interface** - Updated to include ability scores

### ✅ Testing

- [x] **REST Client Tests** - Added 5 test cases to test.rest:
  - Standard array method
  - Point buy method
  - Manual assignment method
  - Roll method
  - Invalid standard array (error case)
- [x] **Compilation** - Zero TypeScript errors
- [x] **Type Checking** - All types valid and consistent
- [x] **Build Output** - Successfully generated to dist/

### ✅ Documentation

- [x] **README.md** - Comprehensive ability scores section added:
  - Supported methods table
  - Model structure
  - Draft workflow examples
  - Validation rules
  - Complete workflow walkthrough
  - Architecture notes
- [x] **ABILITY_SCORES_IMPLEMENTATION.md** - Detailed technical documentation:
  - Database changes
  - Service implementation details
  - Controller/Route design
  - API examples
  - Complete workflows
  - Future enhancements
  - Performance notes
  - Security considerations

---

## File Changes Summary

### Modified Files

1. **prisma/schema.prisma**
   - Added `AbilityScoreSet` model
   - Updated `Character` with `abilityScoreSetId` field
   - Updated `CharacterDraft` with `abilityScoreSetId` field

2. **src/services/draftService.ts**
   - Added `setAbilityScoresForDraft()` method
   - Added `validateAbilityScores()` private method
   - Updated `getDraft()` to include ability scores
   - Updated `finalizeDraft()` to copy ability scores to Character

3. **src/services/characterSheetService.ts**
   - Updated `buildCharacterSheet()` to include ability scores in response

4. **src/controllers/draftController.ts**
   - Added `setAbilityScores()` handler method

5. **src/routes/draftRoutes.ts**
   - Added route for `POST /api/drafts/:id/ability-scores`

6. **src/types/index.ts**
   - Added `AbilityScoreSet` interface
   - Updated `Character` interface
   - Updated `CharacterDraft` interface
   - Updated `CharacterSheetResponse` interface
   - Updated `DraftResponse` interface

7. **test.rest**
   - Added 5 new test cases for ability scores endpoints

8. **README.md**
   - Added comprehensive "Ability Score Assignment" section

### Created Files

1. **ABILITY_SCORES_IMPLEMENTATION.md** - Technical implementation guide

### Database Migrations

1. **prisma/migrations/20260216182403_mig4/migration.sql** - Ability scores migration applied

---

## API Endpoints

### New Endpoint

```
POST /api/drafts/:id/ability-scores
```

**Request Body**:
```json
{
  "method": "standard_array|point_buy|manual|roll",
  "str": number,
  "dex": number,
  "con": number,
  "int": number,
  "wis": number,
  "cha": number
}
```

**Response**: Updated draft including ability scores

**Status Codes**:
- 200: Success - ability scores set
- 400: Validation error - invalid scores for method
- 404: Draft not found
- 500: Server error

### Updated Endpoints

1. **GET /api/drafts/:id** - Now includes `abilityScores` field
2. **GET /api/characters/:id/sheet** - Now includes `abilityScores` in character object

---

## Validation Rules

### Standard Array
- Must contain exactly: [15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8]
- Order doesn't matter
- Error: "Invalid standard array scores. Must use values: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8"

### Point Buy
- Each score: 8-15
- Total cost ≤ 27 points
- Cost: (score - 8) for 8-13, +7 for 14, +9 for 15
- Error: "Point buy total cost X exceeds limit of 27"

### Manual
- Each score: 3-20
- No other restrictions
- Error: "Manual ability scores must be between 3 and 20"

### Roll
- Each score: 3-20
- No other restrictions
- Error: "Rolled ability scores must be between 3 and 20"

---

## Integration Points

### Character Creation Workflow

```
1. Create Draft → POST /api/drafts
2. Set Class → POST /api/drafts/:id/class
3. [Optional] Set Race → POST /api/drafts/:id/race
4. [Optional] Set Background → POST /api/drafts/:id/background
5. [Optional] Set Ability Scores → POST /api/drafts/:id/ability-scores ← NEW
6. Save Choices → POST /api/drafts/:id/choices
7. Finalize Draft → POST /api/drafts/:id/finalize
```

### Character Display

```
Character Sheet → GET /api/characters/:id/sheet
├── Basic Info
├── Class/Race/Background
├── Ability Scores ← NEW
├── Features
├── Required Choices
├── Selected Choices
└── Missing Choices
```

---

## Technical Highlights

### Data-Driven Design
- Validation rules implemented in code (ready for database-driven rules in future)
- No hardcoded game logic
- Extensible method field for new assignment systems

### Reusable Entity
- `AbilityScoreSet` is independent entity
- Can be shared across multiple characters and drafts
- Efficient storage without duplication

### Proper Relationships
- Foreign key constraints with SET NULL on delete
- Optional relationships (characters can exist without ability scores)
- Maintains referential integrity

### Error Handling
- Descriptive validation error messages
- Proper HTTP status codes
- Clear separation of error types (validation vs. not found vs. server)

### Type Safety
- Full TypeScript interfaces
- No implicit `any` types
- Proper null handling with optional fields

---

## Compilation & Build Status

- **TypeScript Version**: 5.x
- **Build Command**: `npm run build`
- **Type Check**: `npx tsc --noEmit`
- **Status**: ✅ Zero errors
- **Output**: dist/ folder with all compiled JavaScript

### Build Artifacts

```
dist/
├── app.js
├── server.js
├── controllers/
│   └── draftController.js
├── services/
│   ├── characterSheetService.js
│   └── draftService.js
├── routes/
│   └── draftRoutes.js
├── types/
│   └── index.js
├── middleware/
│   └── errorHandler.js
└── utils/
    └── logger.js
```

---

## Migration Status

| Migration | Name | Status | Created |
|-----------|------|--------|---------|
| mig1 | 20260216174315_mig1 | ✅ Applied | Initial schema |
| mig2 | 20260216180531_mig2 | ✅ Applied | Draft system |
| mig3 | 20260216181023_mig3 | ✅ Applied | Race/Background |
| mig4 | 20260216182403_mig4 | ✅ Applied | **Ability Scores** |

### mig4 Details

**Tables Modified**:
- `characters` - Added `abilityScoreSetId` column
- `character_drafts` - Added `abilityScoreSetId` column

**Tables Created**:
- `ability_score_sets` - New table with 6 ability score columns

**Constraints**:
- Foreign key: characters → ability_score_sets (ON DELETE SET NULL)
- Foreign key: character_drafts → ability_score_sets (ON DELETE SET NULL)

---

## Testing Instructions

### Manual HTTP Testing

Using test.rest file (for REST Client extension):

```http
# 1. Create a draft
POST http://localhost:4000/api/drafts
{
  "name": "TestCharacter"
}
# Response: { "id": "draft-id", ... }

# 2. Set ability scores with standard array
POST http://localhost:4000/api/drafts/draft-id/ability-scores
{
  "method": "standard_array",
  "str": 15,
  "dex": 14,
  "con": 13,
  "int": 12,
  "wis": 10,
  "cha": 8
}
# Response: Draft with abilityScores: { ... }

# 3. Get updated draft
GET http://localhost:4000/api/drafts/draft-id
# Response: Draft with abilityScores included
```

### Integration Testing

After server restart (to load compiled code):

```bash
# 1. Create draft
DRAFT_ID=$(... POST /api/drafts ...)

# 2. Set class
... POST /api/drafts/$DRAFT_ID/class ...

# 3. Set ability scores
... POST /api/drafts/$DRAFT_ID/ability-scores ...

# 4. Complete workflow
... (choices, finalize) ...

# 5. Get character sheet
GET /api/characters/<character-id>/sheet
# Should include abilityScores field
```

---

## Architecture Considerations

### Future Enhancement: Modifier System

The ability score system is prepared for a modifier system:

```typescript
// Future: Ability Score Modifiers
interface AbilityScoreModifier {
  id: string
  abilityScoreSetId: string
  source: "race" | "item" | "effect"  // Human +1/+1, Ring of +2, etc.
  modifiers: {
    str: number
    dex: number
    // ... etc
  }
}

// Derived calculation:
// displayedStr = baseAbilityScore.str + sum(modifiers)
```

### Current State vs. Future State

**Current** (Implemented):
- ✅ Base ability scores storage
- ✅ Multiple assignment methods with validation
- ✅ Persistent storage
- ✅ Character sheet includes scores

**Future** (Extensible):
- ⏳ Racial ability bonuses (Human +1/+1)
- ⏳ Item bonuses (Ring of +2 to DEX)
- ⏳ Temporary effects (Buff +2 STR for battle)
- ⏳ Automatic derived statistics (modifiers, attack rolls)
- ⏳ Ability score capping rules per game system

---

## Security Notes

- ✅ Server-side validation (no client-side reliance)
- ✅ Clear error messages (no info leaking)
- ✅ Proper input sanitization
- ✅ No SQL injection risk (Prisma + ORM)
- ✅ Ability scores are not modified after draft finalization (in current design)

---

## Performance Characteristics

- **Storage**: ~50 bytes per AbilityScoreSet row
- **Query Performance**: Single include in Prisma query, no N+1 issues
- **Shared Entities**: Potential 100% reuse if templates added
- **Database Impact**: Minimal (one extra table, two nullable columns)

---

## Completion Status

```
┌─ Database Tier ─────────────────────────────────┐
│  ✅ Schema Design              ✅ Migration
│  ✅ Models Created             ✅ Foreign Keys
│  ✅ Relations Defined          ✅ Constraints
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

┌─ Service/Business Logic Tier ──────────────────┐
│  ✅ Validation Logic           ✅ Error Handling
│  ✅ State Management           ✅ Reusability
│  ✅ Integration Points         ✅ Extensibility
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

┌─ Controller/Route Tier ────────────────────────┐
│  ✅ HTTP Handler               ✅ Route Binding
│  ✅ Request Validation         ✅ Response Format
│  ✅ Status Code Handling       ✅ Error Mapping
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

┌─ Type System Tier ─────────────────────────────┐
│  ✅ Interface Definitions      ✅ Type Safety
│  ✅ Optional Fields            ✅ Consistency
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

┌─ Testing & Documentation Tier ─────────────────┐
│  ✅ REST Client Tests          ✅ README Section
│  ✅ Examples Provided          ✅ Tech Documentation
│  ✅ Compilation Passing        ✅ Type Checking
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## Next Steps (When Ready)

1. **Server Restart**: Stop current process, run `node dist/server.js` for updated code
2. **Database Testing**: Create draft → set ability scores → verify persistence
3. **Full Workflow**: Test complete character creation including ability scores
4. **Integration**: Test character sheet returned with scores populated
5. **Validation**: Verify validation for each method (standard_array, point_buy, etc.)

---

## Files & Line References

- [DraftService](src/services/draftService.ts#L214) - Validation and setting logic
- [DraftController](src/controllers/draftController.ts#L129) - HTTP endpoint handler
- [Routes](src/routes/draftRoutes.ts#L14) - Route registration
- [Schema](prisma/schema.prisma#L119) - AbilityScoreSet model
- [Types](src/types/index.ts#L1) - Type definitions
- [Tests](test.rest) - REST Client examples
- [README](README.md) - User-facing documentation
- [Migration](prisma/migrations/20260216182403_mig4/migration.sql) - Database changes

---

## Implementation Complete ✅

The Ability Score Assignment system is fully implemented, type-checked, compiled successfully, and ready for deployment. All validation rules are in place, the database schema is prepared, and the API endpoints are ready for use.

Last Updated: 2026-02-16
