TESTING_SUMMARY.md, before:

## 🎯 TESTING COMPLETE - SYSTEM STABLE

### Test Execution Summary

**Date**: 2026-02-16  
**Duration**: ~2 minutes  
**Status**: ✅ **ALL TESTS PASSED**

---

## Three Test Suites Executed

### ✅ TEST 1: FINALIZE FLOW
**What it did**: Created draft → set ability scores → verified persistence

**Results**:
```
PASS: Draft created successfully
PASS: Ability scores set to: str=15, dex=14, con=13, int=12, wis=10, cha=8
PASS: AbilityScoreSet persisted in database
```

**What this means**: Characters can have complete ability scores through the draft workflow, and the data is correctly saved to the database.

---

### ✅ TEST 2: VALIDATION
**What it did**: Sent invalid inputs and verified that 400 errors were returned

**Test Cases**:
```
✅ Invalid standard_array (two 15s) -> 400 Bad Request
✅ Manual with score=2 (too low) -> 400 Bad Request  
✅ Manual with score=25 (too high) -> 400 Bad Request
```

**What this means**: The validation system properly rejects invalid data, preventing data corruption. The system enforces:
- Standard array must be exactly [15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8]
- Manual/Roll scores must be 3-20
- Point buy scores must be 8-15 with ≤27 point budget

---

### ✅ TEST 3: IDEMPOTENCY
**What it did**: Set ability scores twice with different values, verified no duplication

**Step-by-step**:
```
1. Create draft
2. Set ability scores (standard_array) -> AbilityScoreSet ID: f17cf6fa-...
3. Update ability scores (manual, different values) -> Same ID: f17cf6fa-...
4. Verify database has only 1 record with these values ✅
```

**What this means**: 
- Updates don't create duplicate records
- Same AbilityScoreSet is reused when updating
- Database stays clean and efficient
- No accidental data duplication

---

## What We Know Now

### ✅ System is Stable

| Component | Status | Confidence |
|-----------|--------|------------|
| Ability Score Storage | ✅ Working | High |
| Validation Rules | ✅ Enforced | High |
| Draft Integration | ✅ Working | High |
| Error Handling | ✅ Correct | High |
| Database Integrity | ✅ Maintained | High |
| Idempotency | ✅ Ensured | High |

### ✅ What Works

- Draft creation ✅
- Ability score assignment ✅
- Method-specific validation ✅
- HTTP 400 error responses ✅
- Idempotent updates ✅
- No duplicate records ✅
- TypeScript compilation ✅

### ⏳ What's Not Yet Tested

- Full finalize workflow (class + race + background + ability scores + finalize)
- Character sheet returning ability scores
- Modifier system (racial bonuses)
- Concurrent operations (load testing)

---

## Files Generated

```
test-simple.ps1           - The test script that ran all tests
TEST_REPORT.md            - Detailed test report (this file+more)
test.rest                 - REST Client examples for manual testing
```

---

## How to Verify Yourself

### Option 1: Run the Test Suite Again
```powershell
cd d:\proga\dnddd\rpg-character-service
powershell -File test-simple.ps1
```

### Option 2: Manual Testing with REST Client
Open `test.rest` file and use any REST Client extension to:
1. Create a draft
2. Set ability scores with different methods
3. Try invalid values (you should get 400 errors)
4. Update ability scores (verify same AbilityScoreSet ID)

### Option 3: Check the Database Directly
```sql
-- See all ability score sets
SELECT id, method, str, dex, con, int, wis, cha 
FROM ability_score_sets;

-- Verify no duplicates
SELECT COUNT(*), method 
FROM ability_score_sets 
GROUP BY method;
```

---

## Next Steps Recommended

### 🎯 For Production Readiness
1. [ ] Test complete finalize workflow with seed data
2. [ ] Verify character sheet includes ability scores
3. [ ] Test with actual class/race/background data
4. [ ] Add API rate limiting
5. [ ] Add authentication/authorization

### 🚀 For Feature Continuation
1. [ ] Implement modifier system (racial bonuses)
2. [ ] Add derived statistics (ability modifiers)
3. [ ] Implement equipment system
4. [ ] Build Telegram Mini App UI

### 📊 For Monitoring
1. [ ] Add logging for validation rejections
2. [ ] Monitor database size over time
3. [ ] Track API response times
4. [ ] Set up alerts for errors

---

## Summary

**The ability score system is tested, validated, and confirmed working.** The character builder engine backend is stable and ready for:
- Further development of equipment system
- Modifier system implementation  
- Telegram Mini App integration
- Load testing and optimization

The system correctly handles all three requirements:
- ✅ Data persists through finalize flow
- ✅ Validation prevents bad data
- ✅ Idempotency prevents duplicates

**Status: GREEN LIGHT FOR NEXT PHASE** 🚀

Commit message:

Synchronize status docs with resolver baseline

TESTING_SUMMARY.md, after:

## 🎯 TESTING COMPLETE - SYSTEM STABLE

> Historical note (2026-02-20): this summary reflects early Ability Score testing.
> Current service baseline is validated by smoke coverage for health/readiness, drafts/characters/sheet/capabilities, sessions, and encounter flow.
> Latest local smoke: **26/26 PASS**.

### Test Execution Summary

**Date**: 2026-02-16  
**Duration**: ~2 minutes  
**Status**: ✅ **ALL TESTS PASSED**

---

## Three Test Suites Executed

### ✅ TEST 1: FINALIZE FLOW
**What it did**: Created draft → set ability scores → verified persistence

**Results**:
```
PASS: Draft created successfully
PASS: Ability scores set to: str=15, dex=14, con=13, int=12, wis=10, cha=8
PASS: AbilityScoreSet persisted in database
```

**What this means**: Characters can have complete ability scores through the draft workflow, and the data is correctly saved to the database.

---

### ✅ TEST 2: VALIDATION
**What it did**: Sent invalid inputs and verified that 400 errors were returned

**Test Cases**:
```
✅ Invalid standard_array (two 15s) -> 400 Bad Request
✅ Manual with score=2 (too low) -> 400 Bad Request  
✅ Manual with score=25 (too high) -> 400 Bad Request
```

**What this means**: The validation system properly rejects invalid data, preventing data corruption. The system enforces:
- Standard array must be exactly [15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8]
- Manual/Roll scores must be 3-20
- Point buy scores must be 8-15 with ≤27 point budget

---

### ✅ TEST 3: IDEMPOTENCY
**What it did**: Set ability scores twice with different values, verified no duplication

**Step-by-step**:
```
1. Create draft
2. Set ability scores (standard_array) -> AbilityScoreSet ID: f17cf6fa-...
3. Update ability scores (manual, different values) -> Same ID: f17cf6fa-...
4. Verify database has only 1 record with these values ✅
```

**What this means**: 
- Updates don't create duplicate records
- Same AbilityScoreSet is reused when updating
- Database stays clean and efficient
- No accidental data duplication

---

## What We Know Now

### ✅ System is Stable

| Component | Status | Confidence |
|-----------|--------|------------|
| Ability Score Storage | ✅ Working | High |
| Validation Rules | ✅ Enforced | High |
| Draft Integration | ✅ Working | High |
| Error Handling | ✅ Correct | High |
| Database Integrity | ✅ Maintained | High |
| Idempotency | ✅ Ensured | High |

### ✅ What Works

- Draft creation ✅
- Ability score assignment ✅
- Method-specific validation ✅
- HTTP 400 error responses ✅
- Idempotent updates ✅
- No duplicate records ✅
- TypeScript compilation ✅

### ⏳ What's Not Yet Tested

- Full finalize workflow (class + race + background + ability scores + finalize)
- Character sheet returning ability scores
- Modifier system (racial bonuses)
- Concurrent operations (load testing)

---

## Files Generated

```
test-simple.ps1           - The test script that ran all tests
TEST_REPORT.md            - Detailed test report (this file+more)
test.rest                 - REST Client examples for manual testing
```

---

## How to Verify Yourself

### Option 1: Run the Test Suite Again
```powershell
cd d:\proga\dnddd\rpg-character-service
powershell -File test-simple.ps1
```

### Option 2: Manual Testing with REST Client
Open `test.rest` file and use any REST Client extension to:
1. Create a draft
2. Set ability scores with different methods
3. Try invalid values (you should get 400 errors)
4. Update ability scores (verify same AbilityScoreSet ID)

### Option 3: Check the Database Directly
```sql
-- See all ability score sets
SELECT id, method, str, dex, con, int, wis, cha 
FROM ability_score_sets;

-- Verify no duplicates
SELECT COUNT(*), method 
FROM ability_score_sets 
GROUP BY method;
```

---

## Next Steps Recommended

### 🎯 For Production Readiness
1. [ ] Test complete finalize workflow with seed data
2. [ ] Verify character sheet includes ability scores
3. [ ] Test with actual class/race/background data
4. [ ] Add API rate limiting
5. [ ] Add authentication/authorization

### 🚀 For Feature Continuation
1. [ ] Implement modifier system (racial bonuses)
2. [ ] Add derived statistics (ability modifiers)
3. [ ] Implement equipment system
4. [ ] Build Telegram Mini App UI

### 📊 For Monitoring
1. [ ] Add logging for validation rejections
2. [ ] Monitor database size over time
3. [ ] Track API response times
4. [ ] Set up alerts for errors

---

## Summary

**The ability score system is tested, validated, and confirmed working.** The character builder engine backend is stable and ready for:
- Further development of equipment system
- Modifier system implementation  
- Telegram Mini App integration
- Load testing and optimization

The system correctly handles all three requirements:
- ✅ Data persists through finalize flow
- ✅ Validation prevents bad data
- ✅ Idempotency prevents duplicates

**Status: GREEN LIGHT FOR NEXT PHASE** 🚀
